JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: where
the Republican
leaders' health care bill stands
following
analysis from the Congressional
Budget Office.
Also ahead this Tuesday: all
eyes on the Netherlands
-- what the implications are of
tomorrow's
Dutch election on the rise of
the right in
Europe and populism around the
world.
NIEK STATEMENT, Labor Union
Organizer: People
are fed about the government for
the last
couple of years. During the
economic crisis,
we pay a lot more taxes. They
cut our pension
benefits. It's a protest vote.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the revival
of the groundbreaking
play "Zoot Suit" shines a
spotlight on Mexican-American
culture.
DEMIAN BICHIR, Actor: It's a
masterpiece of
American playwriting. It's about
discrimination
and it's about we Mexicans being
a target
for so many years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: There is less
than a week to
go before the official start of
spring, but
you wouldn't have known it today
in the Northeastern
United States.
A blizzard grounded more than
6,000 passenger
flights, shuttered schools and
claimed at
least one life.
John Yang has our report.
JOHN YANG: From Western
Pennsylvania to New
England, snow fell at a furious
pace. This
time-lapse video shows it piling
up in New
York state.
MAN: After Daylight Savings
Time, I wouldn't
have expected a storm like this.
It kind of
feels more like January than it
does March.
JOHN YANG: Wind gusts of more
than 70 an hour
sent waves pounding into the
shore from Delaware
to Massachusetts.
GOV. DANNEL MALLOY (D),
Connecticut: Good
day to make brownies and/or read
a book.
JOHN YANG: Connecticut Governor
Dannel Malloy
banned all but emergency travel,
so plows
could do their work in near
white-out conditions.
GOV. DANNEL MALLOY: This is New
England. We're
used to handling snow. But when
you get predictions
of 18 to 30 inches with
potentially four-,
five- and 6-inch snowfalls in an
hour, that's
when you have to act.
JOHN YANG: Boston was on track
for up to 18
inches. Schools there were
closed, as they
were in cities like Philadelphia
and New York.
That left thousands of kids with
a day to
play. Even four-legged
frolickers got in the
act.
For air travelers, it was
anything but a holiday.
Southwest Airlines, which flies
more domestic
passengers than any other
carrier, canceled
all flights at 14 airports from
Portland,
Maine, to Washington, D.C.
Thousands of people
were stranded, like this new
bride from Britain.
LAURA BALDERSTONE, Traveler:
We're here on
honeymoon, and we flew to New
York and we
got here fine, but now we're
stuck here on
our way to Orlando. We can't get
a flight
out until tomorrow now. We're
hoping to get
a hotel room, but at the moment,
there aren't
any.
JOHN YANG: NCAA Tournament-bound
basketball
teams and fans had to change
plans to get
to March Madness games later
this week. Amtrak
suspended or modified rail
service along the
busy Northeast Corridor. Nearly
a quarter-million
customers lost power.
New York City was spared the
worst, as the
arctic blast shifted north and
west, bringing
less snow and more pelting
sleet.
GOV. ANDREW CUOMO (D), New York:
Mother Nature
is an unpredictable lady
sometimes. She was
unpredictable once again today.
JOHN YANG: The nation's capital
got less than
expected as well, allowing
federal agencies
to open on a three-hour delay.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: The
commandant of the U.S. Marine
Corps faced
a grilling today over a scandal
involving
photos shared online of female
Corps members
in the nude.
General Robert Neller pledged to
fix the problem
and culture that led to the
scandal. But women
senators in particular said
they'd heard it
all before, including New York
Democrat Kirsten
Gillibrand.
SEN. KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND (D), New
York: When
you say to us it's got to be
different, that
rings hollow. I don't know what
you mean when
you say that. Why does it have
to be different?
Because you all of a sudden feel
that it has
to be different? Who has been
held accountable?
GEN. ROBERT NELLER, Commandant
of the U.S.
Marine Corps: I don't have a
good answer for
you. I'm not going to sit here
and duck around
this thing. I'm not. I'm
responsible. I'm
the commandant. I own this.
That's a lame
answer, but, ma'am, that's all I
-- that's
the best I can tell you right
now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The general
acknowledged the
scandal may hurt the Marine
Corps efforts
to recruit women.
The European Union's highest
court ruled today
that employers may bar Muslim
women from wearing
head scarves on the job. The
ruling says that
a ban is permitted, so long as
it is part
of a company policy, and not a
sign of prejudice.
It's a response to cases brought
by two women,
one Belgian and one French. Both
were fired
for refusing to remove their
head scarves
at work.
The U.N. Human Rights Office is
demanding
that the Syrian government
release tens of
thousands of prisoners. In a
statement today,
the agency's head said: "The
entire country
has become a torture-chamber, a
place of savage
horror and absolute injustice."
In the past, Syria has denied
allegations
of systematic torture in its
prisons. It had
no direct response today.
In Iraq, government troops
pushed deeper into
Western Mosul, and killed a key
Islamic State
commander. Military leaders now
say it's only
a matter of time before they
crush the remaining
ISIS fighters in Iraq's second
largest city.
John Irvine of Independent
Television News
reports from the front lines.
JOHN IRVINE: Rolling back the
Islamic State
has been tortuous. The fighting
here is intense
and brutal.
Advances made by the Iraqi army
have been
slow and the extent of the
damage being wrought
by this inch-by-inch battle for
a city is
simply appalling. In 2014, the
Iraqi army
lost Mosul in six hours. Getting
it all back
is going to take them at least
six months.
The battle for Eastern Mosul
lasted 100 days,
and it cost the Iraqi army at
least 500 dead.
They want to limit the
casualties this side
of the river in Western Mosul.
And, to that
end, they're using far more
ordnance, artillery,
and airstrikes, like the one you
have just
heard.
I.S. can also strike from the
air. That was
a grenade dropped close to us by
one of their
drones. This propaganda video
appears to confirm
the commitment of their fighters
here in Mosul.
It also shows they are far from
running short
on ammunition. No quarter is
being given or
asked for.
Are they good fighters?
MAJ. GEN. BAHAA AZZAWI, Iraqi
Federal Police:
Actually, they fight, they
fight, they fight,
they fight. But we have also
good fighters.
JOHN IRVINE: (INAUDIBLE) in
Mosul Museum today
was rubble. This where I.S.
sledgehammered
history. And while much of what
they bludgeoned
was replica stuff, some
priceless artifacts
were destroyed here.
Now the museum is on the front
line of more
history being made. And the
records will show
that the battle of Mosul was one
of the most
brutal urban fights the world
has ever seen.
Much of the place is
uninhabitable.
And, as the advance continues,
more districts
are being abandoned. As they
fled today, they
can only have been wondering,
what will be
left of Mosul to return to?
JUDY WOODRUFF: More than 200,000
Mosul residents
have been displaced since the
start of the
Iraqi government offensive last
October.
Off the coast of Somalia,
pirates today seized
an oil tanker, the first such
hijacking since
2012. The Aris 13, manned by Sri
Lankan sailors,
was carrying fuel from Djibouti
to the Somali
capital of Mogadishu. The
pirates forced it
to sail to a port town near the
country's
tip. European Union officials
said the men
demanded a ransom.
In Mexico, authorities say they
have found
more than 250 skulls in what
appears to be
a drug cartel burial ground. A
prosecutor
confirms that the hidden site
was discovered
on the outskirts of Veracruz.
Only one-third
of the site has been excavated,
opening the
possibility of more victims to
be found.
Here in Washington, the new head
of Medicaid
and Medicare Services was sworn
in today,
as lawmakers grapple with the
federal government's
role in health care. Vice
President Pence
administered the oath of office
to Seema Verma.
She had been working as a health
care consultant
in his home state of Indiana.
Meanwhile, the nominee to be
U.S. trade representative,
Robert Lighthizer, had his
Senate confirmation
hearing. He argued for an
America-first trade
policy.
On Wall Street today, another
slide in oil
prices pulled stocks lower
again. The Dow
Jones industrial average lost 44
points to
close at 20837. The Nasdaq fell
almost 19,
and the S&P 500 slipped eight.
And Goodyear is saying goodbye
to an icon.
In pre-dawn darkness, the last
of the company's
blimps was decommissioned and
deflated in
Carson, California. Goodyear
began flying
blimps more than 90 years ago.
The tire company
is shifting to semi-rigid
dirigibles that
are larger and faster in
providing aerial
television coverage at major
sports and entertainment
events.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the political
battle to repeal and replace
Obamacare; the
first major test for Europe's
far right, as
the Dutch head to the polls;
what school choice
looks like in the vice
president's home state
of Indiana; and much more.
looks like in the vice
president's home state
of Indiana; and much more.
Leading Republicans in the House
of Representatives
aim to pass their Obamacare
replacement bill
by the end of the month.
But the analysis of the
legislation from the
nonpartisan Congressional Budget
Office yesterday
may have complicated that
timeline.
For some of the party's
conservatives, the
bill still has too much of the
Affordable
Care Act left in it. For some of
its moderates,
the number of people the bill
wouldn't provide
coverage for is cause for alarm.
Today, the
White House and some leading
Republicans left
the door open to change.
From both ends of Pennsylvania
Avenue today,
talk of amending the House
Republican health
care bill.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell spoke
at the Capitol.
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader:
It will be open to amendment in
Senate, like
all reconciliation bills are.
We're anxious
to get past the status quo.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At almost the
same time, White
House spokesman Sean Spicer also
sounded a
note of compromise.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
If you can come with a good idea
that will
strengthen this bill that will
benefit American
patients, we will do it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All of this after
Monday's
report from the Congressional
Budget Office.
The CBO says the GOP plan would
leave 14 million
fewer people insured by next
year, and a total
of 24 million fewer by 2026. It
would also
bring savings that would cut
federal deficits
by $337 billion over that time
frame.
The White House sent out Budget
Director Mick
Mulvaney this morning to
challenge the CBO's
estimates of the uninsured.
MICK MULVANEY, White House
Budget Director:
I don't believe the facts are
correct. I'm
saying that because of a track
record of the
CBO being wrong before, and we
believe the
CBO is wrong now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the other
hand, House Speaker
Paul Ryan embraced the analysis,
saying it
exceeded his expectations. But
hard-line conservatives
in Ryan's caucus, including Ohio
Republican
Jim Jordan, blamed Ryan for
rushing the bill
through the House.
REP. JIM JORDAN (R), Ohio: This
bill doesn't
unite Republicans. This bill
doesn't bring
down the cost of premiums.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Several Senate
Republicans
also warned the bill needs
reworking, among
them, North Carolina's Thom
Tillis:
SEN. THOM TILLIS (R), North
Carolina: The
bill right now, we have
questions that we
have to have answered. Again,
this is not
just about this House bill. It's
series of
things that we have to
accomplish in the coming
months to solve the problem of
the failure
of Obamacare.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, the
Congressional
Budget Office figures bolstered
Democrats'
opposition to the bill.
Senate Minority Leader Chuck
Schumer:
SEN. CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY),
Minority Leader:
It's vintage Donald Trump. Talks
like a populist,
but when he acts, it's
hard-right, favoring
the special interests, and
hurting the middle
class and those trying to get
there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Democratic
leaders brought
out people who said they have
benefited from
Obamacare.
PAULA CHENEVEY, Obamacare
Supporter: The solution
is not to take away care. The
solution is
to find a better way of
providing that care.
I'm not asking for something for
free. I'm
just trying to stay alive.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The GOP bill will
next head
to the House Budget and Rules
Committees.
Joining me now, a member of the
House Freedom
Caucus who has expressed some
reservations
about the bill, Republican
Congressman Ted
Yoho of Florida.
Representative Yoho, welcome to
the program.
What are your reservations, and
could you
support the bill as it is right
now?
REP. TED YOHO (R), Florida:
Thanks, Judy,
for having me.
My reservations are many. I like
the direction
we're moving in, but I could not
support the
bill as it is right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why not?
REP. TED YOHO: There are several
things.
One is the refundable tax
credits. What that
means is the government has to
take money
from us, the taxpayers, and give
it back.
It's a government program. And
what I have
seen with the government
programs in my short
period of time up here, but
being a citizen
for almost 62 years come April,
is a government
program. They tend to get bigger
and bigger,
and they're more -- they're less
efficient.
And any time you give control to
the government,
it costs more money and they're
less efficient.
And I think we have seen this
over and over
again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me ask
you about
that.
(CROSSTALK)
REP. TED YOHO: One of the other
things is
a work requirement for
able-bodied citizens
without dependents, that they're
either looking
for work or they're getting
work, they're
getting reeducated or they're
doing community
service, I think this is a must.
If not you're going to have
growth of people
on the Medicaid system.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, well,
I want to
ask you what you -- about what
you mentioned
first, the tax -- refundable tax
credit, because
Speaker Ryan, as you may know,
is arguing
that that's not an entitlement.
He says letting people keep more
of their
own money and doing what they
want with it
is not an entitlement. He said
it's simply
letting them have the freedom to
purchase
a plan that they feel is best
without the
government forcing them to buy
insurance.
REP. TED YOHO: Well, I agree
with getting
rid of the mandates, because,
again, it goes
back to, if government can
mandate what you
have to do, and then they fine
you with a
fee for not doing it, what else
can they do
in the future, you know, if the
government
says you should do this or that?
I'm all in favor of having
people keep more
of their money. I'm in favor of
the tax credits,
not the refundable ones that go
back to buy
insurance or go into people's
health savings
account. Again, I'm OK with the
tax credits
where you can write off the cost
of your health
insurance if you're an
individual, because
that's incentivizing people to
do that, which
we want them to be, and that's
to be responsible
for their health care.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you think this
bill could
be changed, amended in the
direction that
your concerns are?
I'm asking because, in the
Senate, the concerns
seem to be in the other
direction. Senator
Tom Cotton, Republican from
Arkansas, is saying
he is worried that the bill
doesn't cover
enough people who need care. In
other words,
the pushes and pull seem to be
in the other
direction.
REP. TED YOHO: No, I think this
bill will
get amended. I think you will
have a product
that comes out of the House and
the Senate
that's going to fulfill the
needs that we're
trying to accomplish.
And I think we need to all step
back for a
moment. The Affordable Care Act
was full of
good intentions, but yet it's
collapsing on
its own. And if we did nothing,
which the
Democrats don't want us to
interfere, if we
do nothing, it's going to
collapse, and all
these people that are on that
are going to
lose insurance.
Our goal is to make sure
everybody has access
to health care, that it's an
affordable health
care, but, more importantly,
it's quality
health care. With the Affordable
Care Act,
what's happened is, all these
people have
been running to Medicaid, and
it's been proven
over and over again Medicaid has
the worst
outcomes in the industrialized
world as far
as the quality of health care.
And this is not a way to go just
to say we
have health insurance, but it's
not good health
insurance. We want quality
health insurance
that the American industries,
the American
health care providers can
provide, I feel,
better than anywhere else in the
world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Congressman,
there are
a number of Republican senators
who are concerned
about the loss of Medicaid
coverage.
REP. TED YOHO: Well, again, I
look five to
10 years down the road. If we
don't fix the
underlying problems now, there's
going to
be a lot of people without basic
coverage
and needs.
I mean, they're talking about
cutting Social
Security 25 percent across the
board within
12 years. Nobody wants that. And
so, if we
don't get these things right and
make the
proper reforms now in the
mandatory spending,
this is going to be a disaster
five to 10
years down the road for all
Americans. So,
let's get this right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are you clear on
where President
Trump comes down on this? Has he
tried -- has
he reached out to you to ask for
your support?
REP. TED YOHO: He's not asked
for me personally,
but being a member of the
Freedom Caucus,
we're going to meet with him
this week, and
we will meet with him in the
future.
These are things that -- these
are not Republican
issues or Democratic issues that
one side
is trying to show which one can
come up with
the better plan. This is
something that it's
going to affect all Americans.
And we need
to put what's best for America
right now.
And let's get that together.
And we invite buy-in from the
Democrats to
come onto our side. And just we
want to hear
your issues, instead of just
having a political
debate and have everybody
divided over this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Would the
president be able
to change your mind on this, do
you think?
REP. TED YOHO: I'm opening to
listening to
anybody. And I look forward to
that debate.
And I will stand where I stand
on my issues,
and if somebody can convince me
different,
yes, you know, I'm agreeable.
I'm willing
to compromise, but it has to be
in the right
direction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm asking
because, at this
point, the president has signed
off on the
thing that you don't like, and
that is those
refundable tax credits.
And that is the fact that there
is no work
requirement in here.
REP. TED YOHO: Well, I have also
heard him
say that he's open to a lot of
suggestions,
and that was one of the meetings
we're going
to meet with him with the
Freedom Caucus.
And as long as people are open
to the dialogue,
they're willing to listen to
other sides,
that's where you are going to
get your compromise.
And this is something we have to
do. Every
Republican in the House and the
Senate ran
on repealing and replacing the
Affordable
Care Act 100 percent.
I can only think that we're
going to come
together to accomplish that goal
to get quality
health care that's affordable
for all Americans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, again, the
-- some of
the opposition from Republicans
is coming
from another direction from
yours.
But, Congressman, I do want to
ask you about
the ads being run in your
congressional district
by the American Action Network
for this bill...
REP. TED YOHO: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... saying just
what you have
been saying: It's time to go
ahead and vote
for repeal, to do it with this
bill. Are those
ads going to influence your
vote?
REP. TED YOHO: Not at all. It's
a waste of
money, as far as I'm concerned.
The people sent me up here
again. I'm going
into my third term. We have
taken a strong
stance on this, and people sent
me up here
to go up here and fix this
problem, not to
fall down and -- or, you know,
placate to
the other side.
We're going to fix this and
we're going to
get rid of the Affordable Care
Act, and we
will replace it with commonsense
reforms,
so that people have access to
quality care
that's affordable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's
conservative Republicans
who are paying for those ads.
REP. TED YOHO: It's a -- a
Republican paid
for their ad. I don't know how
conservative
they are.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
Congressman Ted Yoho, Republican
of Florida,
thank you very much.
REP. TED YOHO: Thank you. Judy,
appreciate
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we should
note that the
American Action Network is a
not-for-profit
group allied with the House
Republican leadership.
It's running these ads for the
health care
repeal bill in 30 congressional
districts.
In the Netherlands, voters head
to the polls
tomorrow, in Europe's first big
and closely
watched election of the year. An
ardent nationalist,
running on an anti-immigrant
agenda, is bidding
for the prime minister's office,
hoping to
lead the way for similar
candidates in France
and Germany.
The election also comes amid an
escalating
war of words between the Dutch
government
and Turkey over a referendum
next month that
could give President Recep
Tayyip Erdogan
vast new powers.
Just today, Erdogan accused
Dutch troops of
complicity in the 1995 massacre
of 8,000 Bosnian
Muslims at Srebrenica. That's a
charge which
a Dutch court had previously
cleared.
Our special correspondent,
Malcolm Brabant,
traveled throughout Holland for
us, and he
brings us this report.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Convicted of
inciting discrimination,
he's labeled Moroccans as scum,
one of Europe's
most divisive politicians, Geert
Wilders is
hoping to emulate Donald Trump's
anti-establishment
victory, while maintaining a
Dutch veneer.
GEERT WILDERS, Leader, Freedom
Party: I'm
no Mr. Trump. I am my own man.
And so we are
having a Dutch campaign here
about Dutch issues,
and not about America.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The would-be
prime minister's
manifesto is only one-page long.
It's a full-frontal
attack on Islam.
GEERT WILDERS: It certainly is a
threat. It's
an existential threat. I'm not
talking about
all the Muslims, but the Islamic
ideology
is an ideology of violence, of
hate, of submission,
and not of assimilation. And I
believe Islam
and freedom are incompatible.
So, if we want to stay free
countries also
for our children and
grandchildren in the
future, we have to have less
Islam in our
societies, because the more it
dominates and
the stronger it becomes, then
the less freedom
we will have.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This mosque in
Rotterdam
is the country's biggest. If
Wilders gets
his way, every mosque will be
closed down,
the Koran will be banned, as
will Islamic
scarves in public places.
At Friday prayers, security
guard Rocalita
Angelista celebrated his
conversion to Islam.
According to a recent survey,
most Dutch people
estimated that 20 percent of the
17 million
population were Muslims. The
true figure is
6 percent.
ROCALITA ANGELISTA, Netherlands:
You cannot
change us. We are here, and
maybe we were
not born here, but some of us,
my son, my
daughter, is born here, because
they are Dutch.
I think Wilders will lose.
MALCOLM BRABANT: At the end of
Friday prayers,
there was a collection to raise
money for
a new mosque in the city of
Utrecht. This
expansionism concerns voters in
the picturesque
southern town of Valkenburg,
where Wilders
made a rare pre-election
appearance.
TOM KEIDENER, Student: A lot of
criminals
are Muslims. It's not that all
Muslims are
bad, but a lot of them have that
ideology,
and they want to take over the
Christians,
and they think that Muslims are
better and
the rules of Sharia have to be
the rules of
-- are more important than rules
of the law,
the Dutch law.
WOMAN (through translator): I'm
not worried
about an attack, but I am most
worried about
the influence of our way of
life. And we have
to stop that.
FERRY SCHIPPERS, Netherlands:
Wilders is like
a hot air balloon. He is just
telling the
people what they want to hear.
We have to
keep moving in the right
direction. And with
Wilders, we are moving in the
opposite direction.
We are going backwards.
MALCOLM BRABANT: We have met
Ferry Schippers
before, on the front line of
Europe's immigration
crisis. He was leading the
Doctors Without
Borders team on board the aid
ship Aquarius
last summer, rescuing African
migrants off
the Libyan coast and taking them
to Italy.
FERRY SCHIPPERS: A good society
is a society
that take care of the weak. It's
kind of strange,
because we used to be such a
tolerant country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: We have come to
Maastricht
to get a reaction to Wilders'
plan to reject
all asylum seekers, ban
immigrants from Muslim
countries, and close down asylum
centers.
Nader Elawa is from Damascus. He
landed on
the Greek island of Lesbos in
December 2015
and managed to reach the
Netherlands just
before the migrant trail to
Northern Europe
was closed down.
NADER ELAWA, Refugee (through
translator):
The refugees are somehow very
peaceful, and
I don't think they will make any
problem for
here. Me, I told you about
myself. If something
happen to Netherlands, I protect
it with my
life, because my Netherlands
people, I found
them they help me a lot. So why
I must do
something bad to them?
MALCOLM BRABANT: This is
Rotterdam, whose
prosperity is partly due to its
location as
the gateway to Europe. Geert
Wilders wants
the Netherlands to follow
Britain out of the
European Union, and there are
sympathizers
at the port.
Niek Stam claims to be the
country's most
militant labor union organizer.
He says the
working class feel insecure
about their prospects
because of relentless automation
and a constant
drive to be competitive. The
union is campaigning
for robots to be taxed.
MAN: Robots do not buy cars.
Neither do they
shop for groceries, which leads
to a fundamental
question: Who's going to buy all
these products
when up to 40 percent of present
jobs vanish?
No, we're not just going to sit
and wait and
do nothing.
NIEK STAM, Labor Union
Organizer: Twenty percent
of my membership will vote for
Geert Wilders,
but it doesn't mean that they
are racist.
I mean, it's a vote -- it's a
protest vote.
People are fed about the
government for the
last couple of years. During the
economic
crisis, we pay a lot more taxes.
They cut
our pension benefits. It's a
protest vote.
It's not a solution vote.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But forming a
government
here is never smooth sailing; 28
parties are
contesting the election. A
coalition of four
or five is needed to create a
government.
Wilders' big problem is that no
one wants
to get on board with him.
According to the latest opinion
polls, Geert
Wilders is no longer in the
lead, and has
dropped back to second place.
But after the
surprise results in the Brexit
referendum
and the American presidential
election, the
sitting Dutch prime minister is
not taking
victory for granted.
Prime minister Mark Rutte called
on the Dutch
to set an example to voters in
France and
Germany, where right-wing
nationalists are
flourishing ahead of elections
later this
year.
MARK RUTTE, Prime Minister of
the Netherlands:
These elections are crucial. Let
us stop the
domino effect right here, this
week, this
Wednesday, the domino effect of
the wrong
sort of populism winning in this
world.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Are there any
circumstances
under which you would enter into
a coalition
partnership with Geert Wilders?
MARK RUTTE: The answer is, no,
we won't do
that. The reasons are that he --
at -- when
the crisis was the deepest in
2012, he ran
away from responsibility.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Political
scientist Jean
Tillie believes that, although
Rutte finds
Wilders' views on Islam
distasteful, it's
a mistake not to engage with
him.
JEAN TILLIE, Political
Scientist: We saw it
in England in the Brexit. People
were ignored,
and look what happened. We saw
it in America.
People were ignored, and look
what happened.
So, don't ignore people when
they have strong
feelings.
You are not obliged to
incorporate them in
the political system, but you
cannot ignore
a very large group of people
consistently
for 30 years.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The election is
taking place
amid an escalating dispute with
Turkey. The
Netherlands prevented two
Turkish ministers
from addressing a rally in
Rotterdam, backing
President Erdogan's referendum
request for
greater powers.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish
President (through
translator): Some European
countries have
become hostages in the hands of
racist and
fascist parties. We have been
pointing to
the rise of fascism, racism and
xenophobia
in Europe and warning our
interlocutors about
this issue.
MARK RUTTE: Turkey is a proud
country. But,
also, the Netherlands is a proud
country.
We will never negotiate under
threats.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Dutch analysts
believe that
Mark Rutte's handling of this
crisis could
boost his chances. With so much
at stake,
rarely has there been this level
of tension
beneath the Netherlands'
tranquil facade.
For the "PBS NewsHour" I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Amsterdam.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": an
old play sparks
new discussions on
Mexican-American life;
and sweaters for chickens living
out of their
comfort zones.
But first: The Trump
administration has made
it very clear that it
wholeheartedly supports
school choice.
Secretary of Education Betsy
DeVos is a strong
advocate of vouchers, which
allow parents
to use public tax dollars to pay
for a private
school education. Supporters say
vouchers
help students succeed, but
opponents say they
siphon away crucial public
school resources.
Indiana has one of the largest
voucher programs
in the country.
And special correspondent Lisa
Stark of our
partner Education Week went to
see how it's
working for our regular segment
Making the
Grade.
LISA STARK: It's the start of
the day at Emmaus
Lutheran School in Fort Wayne,
Indiana, where
chapel is held once a week.
About 20 miles away, this is how
the day begins
at Fairfield Elementary, the
city's largest
public elementary school.
Fairfield is warm and welcoming.
So is Emmaus.
Fairfield get top grades from
the state for
academics. So does Emmaus. But
one is a public
school, the other a private
school that accepts
vouchers.
They symbolize opposite sides of
the heated
voucher debate, only likely to
intensify,
given the administration's
strong support
for school choice.
At the heart of the debate,
money, and how
education dollars are divvied
up. Normally,
the state distributes tax
dollars to public
schools to educate students. In
Indiana, that's
about $5,800 a student. Vouchers
change that.
A portion of the money, the tax
dollars, follow
the student instead, allowing
parents the
use those dollars to pay tuition
at the private
school of their choice.
That's the voucher program.
Robert Enlow is an advocate.
ROBERT ENLOW, President,
EdChoice: We have
seen over time our traditional
school systems,
because they're based on zip
code assignment
and where you live, not
providing always the
best options for families.
Let's put the money in the
backpacks of the
parent and let them choose where
they want
to go by giving parents the best
options for
their kids.
LISA STARK: Indiana is one of
nearly 30 states
that offers vouchers or similar
programs.
All have the same goal: allowing
parents to
use public funds for private
schooling.
Jerry and Miriam Lunz use
vouchers to send
their children to private
Lutheran schools,
rather than their local public
schools.
JERRY LUNZ, Parent: I would say
the schools
in our particular area are not
the best from
the academic standpoint. That
played into
some of it, but mostly the moral
aspect is
what we wanted, the Christian
aspect, same
taught at the school as at the
home.
LISA STARK: Without vouchers,
private high
school was mostly out of reach.
MIRIAM LUNZ, Parent: We looked
at the financial
aspect, and we had no idea how
we were going
to cover the cost. Jerry is the
hardest-working
truck driver I know, but that
doesn't pay
a lot.
LISA STARK: More than 300
private schools
in Indiana accept vouchers. The
vast majority
are religious schools.
Keith Martin is the principal at
Emmaus Lutheran.
Why does this school participate
in the voucher
program?
KEITH MARTIN, Principal, Emmaus
Lutheran School:
Simply because it allows us to
serve more
students and more families.
LISA STARK: In fact, nearly half
of the 193
students at Emmaus rely on
vouchers, bringing
in about $400,000 for the
school, more than
a third of its budget.
KEITH MARTIN: It's obviously
very helpful,
but you know, our school was
here 100 years
before the voucher program, and
I'm confident
that we will have it here 100
years with or
without the voucher program.
LISA STARK: At Fairfield
Elementary, a drop
in students and resources due
partly to vouchers
has strained budgets, according
to principal
Lindsay Amstutz-Martin.
LINDSAY AMSTUTZ-MARTIN,
Principal, Fairfield
Elementary: I do know I have
lost teachers
every year. I have lost
allocations of teachers
every year, because we're losing
students,
and sometimes that makes --
certain grade
levels' class sizes are large.
LISA STARK: In kindergarten, for
example,
there are 28 students and just
one teacher.
Fort Wayne Superintendent Wendy
Robinson sees
vouchers as an assault on public
schools.
WENDY ROBINSON, Fort Wayne
Community Schools
Superintendent: You have
established a totally
separate school system on the
back of a structure
that was intended for public
schools.
LISA STARK: Another concern,
Robinson says
this is unfair competition, that
public schools,
unlike private ones, are
required to educate
everyone who comes in the door,
including
students with disabilities or
limited English
skills, who require more
resources.
WENDY ROBINSON: If they took
every student,
if they were responsible for
special ed, if
they took ELL, if they were not
allowed to
pick and choose which kids they
took, bring
it on.
LISA STARK: Indiana's program
started out
for low-income students. It was
greatly expanded.
It now includes students who
never attended
public schools, and middle-class
families
were added under then Governor,
now Vice President
Mike Pence.
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States:
I have also long believed that
parents should
be able to choose where their
kids go to school.
LISA STARK: Enrollment
skyrocketed from 9,000
students to more than 34,000, 3
percent of
the school population. This
year, $146 million
in tax dollars is going to
private schools.
School choice, including
vouchers, is high
on the agenda of President Trump
and Education
Secretary Betsy DeVos. Trump's
first school
visit was to a Florida Catholic
school that
accepts vouchers.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Education is the civil rights
issue of our
time. And it's why I have asked
Congress to
support a school choice bill.
LISA STARK: Nationally, the
results on vouchers
are mixed, with little or no
improvement in
test scores for voucher
students. Still, some
29 states are considering dozens
of bills
that would start or expand
vouchers and similar
programs.
ROBERT ENLOW: We have seen
dramatic growth.
What we're going to see more of
is more and
more parents demanding more and
more options.
But public school officials
wonder, at what
cost?
WENDY ROBINSON: I'm worried that
people aren't
alarmed. Public education is the
backbone
of this country.
LISA STARK: A backbone
increasingly under
pressure.
I'm Lisa Stark of Education Week
in Fort Wayne,
Indiana, for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: A landmark
play about
the struggles of
Mexican-Americans gets an
acclaimed revival, one that
speaks to the
times we live in.
Jeffrey Brown has the story from
Los Angeles.
JEFFREY BROWN: It is a deeply
American story,
a Mexican-American story, "Zoot
Suit" the
play, set in Los Angeles in the
1940s, amid
rampant discrimination, a
real-life murder
trial and the so-called Zoot
Suit Riots.
ACTOR: The grand jury has just
indicted you
all for the same identical
crime, not just
you four, the whole entire 38th
Street Gang.
JEFFREY BROWN: And "Zoot Suit,"
the cultural
phenomenon, reaching from its
premiere in
1978 at L.A.'s Mark Taper Forum,
to Broadway,
to a 1981 film, and now, 38
years later, to
a revival at the theater where
it began.
Its writer and director, then
and now, is
Luis Valdez.
LUIS VALDEZ, Writer/Director,
"Zoot Suit":
I believe in entertainment. I
love entertainment,
you know? But I love it with a
purpose. I
want people to come out of here
thinking about
what they saw, and perhaps
reassessing what's
happening in their own lives
with their families.
And, more than anything I hope
that people
leave here with hope and
inspiration.
JEFFREY BROWN: Valdez received a
National
Medal of the Arts from President
Obama in
2015 for -- quote --
"illuminating the human
spirit in the face of social
injustice."
He spent his early years in a
family of migrant
workers.
Is it correct what I read, that
you were 6
when you first discovered your
love of theater
in a camp?
LUIS VALDEZ: In a camp, labor
camp, I got
hooked, yes. I auditioned, and I
won my first
role. Unfortunately, the week of
the show,
we were evicted from the labor
camp where
we were staying, and I was never
in the play.
So, that left a big gap, a big
hole in my
chest, you know?
JEFFREY BROWN: It's an early
lesson in theater
and in politics, right?
LUIS VALDEZ: Well, exactly, the
desire to
do theater, and anger, residual
anger, because
we had been evicted. So, 20
years later, roughly,
I went to Cesar Chavez and
pitched him an
idea of theater of, by and for
farmworkers.
JEFFREY BROWN: That was the
beginning of El
Teatro Campesino, a bilingual
theater group
of farmworkers who performed
short plays for
other migrants, often on flatbed
trucks in
the middle of California fields.
Valdez continued to write and
produce larger
works as well, becoming known as
the godfather
of Chicano theater. In 1977, he
was asked
to create a new production for
the Mark Taper
Forum. He chose the story of
Pachuco culture,
Mexican-American urban street
life, and a
sensational murder trial from
the 1940s in
which more than a dozen Chicano
gang youth
were convicted, followed by
riots.
Valdez used actual transcripts
and news headlines
from the era. The original
production helped
launch the career of many
Chicano actors,
including Edward James Olmos.
Luis' brother
Daniel Valdez and Rose Portillo
were also
part of the original cast,
playing the young
lovers at the heart of the
drama.
DANIEL VALDEZ, Actor: It was
ahead of its
time. Very few Chicanos were
really in the
acting business. So, for us, you
know, so
young a cast that was coming
together, we
were people off the street
making our first
mark on the industry.
But seeing the reactions of the
audience and
seeing what the audience
responded to, because
"Zoot Suit" is much more than a
play -- it's
an event. In many ways, it was a
spiritual
experience in that sense.
JEFFREY BROWN: It was also
putting people
on the stage and a story on the
stage that
most audiences haven't seen.
DANIEL VALDEZ: Exactly.
ROSE PORTILLO, Actress: They
hadn't seen characters
like this. They'd not seen
Hispanic, Latino,
Chicano, whatever you want to
call us, Mexican-Americans,
on the stage.
And it was a moment where
several things were
going on. One is, you don't
always know what
you're missing until you see it.
So, to suddenly
see this play and the stage
filled with people
that looked like us was, oh, my
God, I didn't
realize I was missing that, and
so that sense
of pride and I belong here, too.
JEFFREY BROWN: All these years
later, they
still belong, this time playing
the parents
of the young protagonist, Henry
Reyna. I asked
how it felt to return.
ROSE PORTILLO: When I walked
into the audition
room, and it was the same room
that I had
walked into 38 years ago, and
this person
was also at the other end of the
table, and
Luis was on the other end of the
table.
JEFFREY BROWN: Looking just the
same as all
those years ago?
ROSE PORTILLO: Exactly the same.
We had not
changed at all.
And I just took a breath, and I
put my bag
down, and I went, a moment,
please. This is
so surreal.
DANIEL VALDEZ: Yes. I would say
it's Groundhog
Day.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Now a new
generation of younger
Latino actors has taken the
stage, joined
by one of Mexico's leading film
and TV stars,
Demian Bichir, who fell in love
with the "Zoot
Suit" story as a teenager.
DEMIAN BICHIR, Actor: I wanted
to be in it.
It was my idea. And I pursued
it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. You heard
about it and
you said, I have to do this?
DEMIAN BICHIR: That's pretty
much the way
it happened.
JEFFREY BROWN: Bichir plays what
would become
the most iconic role in "Zoot
Suit," El Pachuco,
a kind of trickster spirit
figure who hovers
around and over the action,
connecting the
streets of 1940s Los Angeles to
a mythological
and spiritual past.
DEMIAN BICHIR: He's the story of
us. He is
every Mexican from the beginning
of times
up until now. He's a devilish
presence, he's
an angel, he's your best
adviser, your best
friend and your worst enemy.
JEFFREY BROWN: Taking on the
role, says Bichir,
was irresistible. But, like
others we spoke
to, he had another reason he
wanted to take
part in the new "Zoot Suit": for
moments like
this one, from a defense lawyer
in the 1940s
trial.
DEMIAN BICHIR: I have tried to
defend what
is most precious to our American
society,
a society that is now at war
against the forces
of racial intolerance.
A big part of me making that
decision was
how important this play is for
the times that
we live in. This is a classic.
It's a masterpiece
of American playwriting. It's
about discrimination
and it's about we Mexicans being
a target
for so many years.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Zoot Suit" plays
through March
26.
From the Mark Taper Forum in Los
Angeles,
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be
back shortly
with a look at one effort to
keep our fowl
friends warm.
But, first, take a moment to
hear from your
local PBS station. It's a chance
to offer
your support, which helps to
keep programs
like ours on the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: With the late
winter storm
bearing down on Massachusetts,
one group of
plucky individuals in Milton,
Massachusetts,
got together to help out their
neighbors across
the road.
From PBS station WGBH, Cristina
Quinn has
the story.
CRISTINA QUINN: What happens
when the chicken
across the road is cold? You ask
your neighbors
to knit him a sweater, which is
exactly what
Erica Max, program director of
the Wakefield
Estate, did, when she noticed
that Prince
Peep, a Malaysian Serama
rooster, started
shivering when the temperature
dropped.
ERICA MAX, Program Director,
Wakefield Estate:
I discovered that Serama
roosters, you know,
normally would live very close
to the equator,
and they are not well suited to
this climate
in New England.
CRISTINA QUINN: So Max called up
Nancy Kearns,
who lives at Fuller Village, a
retirement
community across the street, and
asked her
if she and her knitting group
could help Prince
Peep.
NANCY KEARNS, Friend: I said,
let's give it
a try. So I went online. There's
a very wonderful
site called Pinterest. And I
just typed in
the words "chicken sweater," and
I found a
pattern from England.
CRISTINA QUINN: These ladies do
a lot of knitting
for charities like Project
Linus, a nationwide
organization that donates
homemade blankets
to sick children, so knitting
for chickens
was a departure for them, and it
came with
a lot of trial and error.
NANCY KEARNS: Because the
pattern really was
for big chickens. And Prince
Peep, in particular,
NANCY KEARNS: Because the
pattern really was
for big chickens. And Prince
Peep, in particular,
is a miniature.
CRISTINA QUINN: Weighing in at
roughly one
pound, he's certainly
diminutive. But what
didn't fit Prince Peep looked
tailor-made
for the larger hens. And it
worked out perfectly,
since many of them were molting,
making them
more vulnerable to
the elements.
ERICA MAX: Oh, well, you look
marvelous, darling.
CRISTINA QUINN: On this
particular day, Erica
Max couldn't find Prince Peep's
sweater. It's
so tiny that it's easy to
misplace. So we
found another easygoing chicken
to try one
so tiny that it's easy to
misplace. So we
found another easygoing chicken
to try one
on.
ERICA MAX: We have chicken and
we have a sweater.
We're going to attempt to put a
sweater on
ERICA MAX: We have chicken and
we have a sweater.
We're going to attempt to put a
sweater on
a chicken. We are going to
attempt.
And this beautiful hen
is not used to having sweaters
put on her.
But this
is not used to having sweaters
put on her.
But this
is her first time, so we can
give her a little
credit for being nervous. But
it's certainly
a fetching sweater.
CRISTINA QUINN: It's lovely.
ERICA MAX: Yes, that's a very
good-looking
sweater.
CRISTINA QUINN: That really
suits you. Chicken,
this really suits you.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Cristina Quinn
in Milton, Massachusetts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You have to love
it. I wonder
what those chickens did before
they had sweaters
JUDY WOODRUFF: You have to love
it. I wonder
what those chickens did before
they had sweaters
knitted for them. We will find
out.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: In honor
of Pi Day -- that's an
unofficial holiday
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: In honor
of Pi Day -- that's an
unofficial holiday
celebrating the mathematical
constant -- it's
a perfect time to play games
involving circles.
We have some pro tips on
Hula-Hoop and yo-yoing
like a mathematician.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight, your
full service news program.
On Wednesday, our Leading Edge
team takes
a look at new technology that
allows people
with paralysis to communicate.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.